Here are the documents that got me into grad school:

My research proposal
My letter of intent
My portfolio

###Program Proposal for Special Individualized Program (M.A.)

####Submitted by Roxanne Baril-Bédard, January 2017

##The Sublime in Videogames - Digital Embodiment,  Spatiality and the Intangible

[**Abstract:**]{.sc} In my research I intend to create interactive digital experiences that explore the intersection of spatial theory, the philosophy of aesthetics, and game studies. Tackling the contemporary game studies researches regarding topology and affective design, I want to create artistic interactive pieces that explore and expand on the medium’s unique poetic potential to foster emotional interpellation through motion. The resulting interactive media productions, and the literature accompanying them, will contribute to the current trend in game and new media studies in which games are analyzed from a multidisciplinary perspective, in relation to but differentiated from other artistic and media practices.
---
[**Introduction**]{.sc}
There are a plethora of ways to approach videogames. Many wonder about their effect on audiences, from a social sciences standpoint; others are concerned about their narrative potential, as a non-linear, participative media; others still ponder about the technicalities needed to create virtual worlds. One of the early theorists of videogames, Espen Aarseth, have stated in the editorial of the International Journal of Computer Game Research’s first edition “[the simulation aspect of videogames] is radically different to [textual] narratives as a cognitive and communicative structure” (Aarseth, 2001). There is something unique to interactive digital experiences that scholars are interested to explore.
	However, this emphasis on the novelty of videogames as a medium sometimes falls short of seeing the potential parallels with other forms of design, art, and their surrounding discursive traditions. In particular, it disdains theoretical cross-pollination with the traditions analyzing the emotional experiential aspects of art, which could only deepen game scholars and designers’ perspectives of the medium’s potentiality. Because of their spatial nature, and by the plurilocative intangible embodiment they necessitate, videogames would be better understood as sensory works of art, or as immersive experiences. More so, a meta-analysis of this game studies trend can be found in “Fundamental Component of the Gameplay Experience,” published in 2007 by Laura Ermi and Frans Mäyrä. However, while they skillfully define different virtual re-embodiments, they mostly rely on psychology literature to support their arguments and their taxonomical classification of experiences, rather than philosophy or art history.
	In particular, in order to understand the emotional depth of videogames and the embodiment of their interactive experiences, one should weave literature from both architectural theory and philosophy of affect with videogames studies. For example, in The Sublime and Modern Architecture: Unmasking (an Aesthetic of) Abstraction, Kate Nesbitt underlines and explains one of  architecture’s ambitious leitmotif in designing affect: “In the instance of the sublime,’ she says, ‘the experience is visceral. […] The sublime is the path through which architecture achieves metaphysical import” (1995). Using definitions of the sublime posited by other fields of study, like the ones expounded by Nesbitt, I will be equipped with theoretical tools to probe digital embodiment in virtual environment. This kind of intense, mystical even, emotional response, has rarely if at all been studied by videogame scholars - maybe studying it would allow to create games, like Nesbitt says, of “metaphysical import.” 
	Also, much like architecture, digital interactive spaces have to be lived to be experienced. Comparing architectural experience to cinema, Giuliana Bruno states: “The changing position of a body in space creates architectural and cinematic grounds. The consumer of architectural (viewing) space is the prototype of the film spectator” (1997). It must be clear that videogames share even more characteristic with architecture than with traditional linear media, and as such, their study should be, if not enmeshed with, at least influenced by the scholarly architectural tradition. Indeed, while famous virtual spatiality scholars such as Micheal Nitsche do approach digital scapes, they are more interested by the technical problematics of rendering complex environment digitally than by their unique poetics (2008) - an angle legitimized by architectural studies tradition.
	However, digital interactive experience can but be unparalleled by material productions as they alone can actualize experiences in non-Euclidian typology. In other words, virtual simulation allow players to experience spaces that can only exist outside of a materiality. Some game scholars have briefly marvelled at such abstracted spaces possibilities, like Steven Poole when he describes them even as “space purer than any that exists in the real universe […] a pure dream of unhindered movement and harmonious action” (2000). However, many of the existing definitions of them focus on their technicality rather than their affective potential. Moreover, we cannot ignore the similitude between the architectural definition of the sublime and the dream-like quality invoked to describe non-Euclidian spaces.
	Furthermore, this potential for fostering the sublime is not ignored by game designers. Notably, Jenova Chen, creator of indie darling game Journey (2012), has explained that his idea has sprouted from a conversation with a NASA astronaut about their experience of the sublime resulting from seeing the Earth from space (Solarski, 2012). Works like his, critically and publically acclaimed, are few and far between, but studying them will prove a solid starting point into understanding this very intangible affect.

[**Research**]{.sc}
This is where my research begins. I am interested in how we may understand plurilocative embodiment in the digital space and the potential thereof for affective environmental design, rather than focusing on narratives, on systems, or on players and their cultural background. This focus on games as experience and game as environment necessitate exploring the relation of perceptions and meaning making to motion in (virtual) space. Moreover, I want to pursue this theoretical percolation through iterating interactive experiences in a research-creation program, in order to actualize the insights gathered from different academic fields.
	Naturally, the very idea of making games that explore the possibilities for experiencing the sublime necessitate an interdisciplinary approach. My work will combine procedurally generative art, three-dimensional world building as well as game systems. Although I will draw on architecture and on philosophy, my work will aim to weave their influences in a cohesive and novel whole. 
	In formulating an answer to these questions, I will create work and forge collaborations with other game scholars, designers, and critics. Through technical practice as well as through continuous conceptual exploration, I will keep on being involved in the booming videogame community in Montreal and in Concordia. Ultimately, I hope to create a new poetic of videogame experiences and disseminate alternative ambitions for this interactive media.
---

[**Bibliography**]{.sc}
Aarseth, Espen (2001), Computer Game Studies, Year One, International Journal of Computer Game Research. Online publication.

Bruno, Giuliana (1997), “Site-seeing: Architecture and the Moving Image,” Wide Angle 19.4, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Ohio, OH

thatgamecompany (2012), Journey, dir. Jenova Chen, Sony Computer Entertainment

Ermi, Laura and Frans Mäyrä (2007), “Fundamental Components of the Gameplay Experience,” Worlds in Play: International Perspectives on Digital Games Research, Peter Lang Publishing, New York, NY

Poole, Steven (2000), Trigger Happy: Videogames and the Entertainment Revolution, Arcade Publishing, New York, NY

Nitsche, Micheal (2008) Video Game Spaces: Image, Play, and Structure in 3D Worlds, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA

Nesbitt, Kate (1995), “The Sublime and Modern Architecture: Unmasking (an Aesthetic of) Abstraction,” New Literary History 26.1, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Ohio, OH

Solarski, Chris (2012), Drawing Basics and Videogame Art, Watson-Guptill Publication, New York, NY
---
[**Research Methods and Specific Objectives**]{.sc}
I will undergo readings at the intersection of philosophy, art history, and design theory. Indeed, a research program that seeks to posit a new poetics of videogame experiences and to explore the sublime would need to address, in one way or another, each of these theoretical areas. To the extent that such an in-depth look into these many areas is possible, my research will encompass them all, weaving their different influence in a cohesive and rich tapestry of academic literature.
	Speaking broadly, my research will attempt to situate digital embodiment experience within the context of phenomenology as well as architectural theory. A quick investigation of both these fields reveals that, while it is rare to find references to their tradition from a videogame studies perspective, the opposite is even less likely.
	Specifically, I am interested in three areas: (1) digital (plurilocative) embodiment; (2) fostering the sublime through spatial design; and (3) procedural generation to engineer the sublime in the interstices between code and luck. Percolating between these poles will allow me to triangulate most efficiently towards my greater aim of understanding the potential for the sublime in videogames.
	My research has another concrete goal as well. Through these explorations towards designing the sublime, my findings will serve other multimedia creators’ ambitions in creating metaphysical virtual experiences. My experience as a double major in Communications Studies and Religious Studies, as well as my background in costume design, have convinced me that knowledge of other disciplines is nothing short of essential to create artefact of conceptual breadth. Accordingly, the course of my research will bring me into closer contact with both academicians from different fields and with videogame creators, whom will too inform my practice and my enquiries, through ethnographical interviews, as well as through a research-creation process of collaborating with creators in game and design jams.
---
