# The Rise and Demise of Virtual Reality

*[Critical Commons Manager](http://www.criticalcommons.org/Members/JLipshin/clips/avatar-and-the-internet-as-a-neural-network) about Avatar (2009).* 

>It is remarkable how repetitive the tropes of virtual reality are when depicted in commercial cinema of the past three decades. And while the technologies driving VR have evolved, the promise of their actualization and the ways they interface with human bodies has remained relatively static, at least in the cinematic imaginary. The possibility of experiencing illicit, dangerous or forbidden actions give rise to repeated extremes of exoticism, adventure, violence and erotics, relentlessly portrayed through a first-person camera point of view. Another way of looking at it is that VR provides an excuse for Hollywood cinema to simultaneously indulge in the excesses of such visual pleasures, while distancing itself from the technology that is diegetically responsible for presenting such content to audiences. 
>
>A cursory survey of movies and TV shows since the early 1980s reveals the inscription and reinscription of standard tropes of VR - complex technological apparatuses that deliver "safe" (but never completely safe!) experiences that we may be denied in everyday life: particularly extremes of violence, sexual pleasure and other kinds of exoticism. The apotheosis of these depictions in American entertainment came in 1995, with the release of more than a half-dozen feature films and TV shows within the space of a few months. Among these, Strange Days, Virtuosity and VR5 all delivered a vision of virtual reality that was indistinguishable from real life -- that is complete sensory, emotional immersion in a world that was entirely generated by a computer. In 1995, if TV and movies were to be believed, the coming generation of VR technology was poised to deliver consumer-level virtual reality that was indistinguishable from the real world. Ellen Strain has termed this phenomenon of the cinematic imaginary "virtual virtual reality," noting that the Hollywood fantasies of VR led to impossibly high expectations in comparison with actually existing virtual reality technologies in the 1990s. So by the time Nintendo released the Virtual Boy in 1995, consumers who paid nearly $200 for the 3D gaming system experienced not sensory immersion but a 2-bit monochromatic LED display with images about the size of a YouTube video. 
>
>Nintendo went on to release a limited number of cartridges based on existing Game Boy titles such as Mario Tennis, Bowling, Golf, Baseball, Pinball, Boxing and Tetris. But the primary sensory response from players was a combination of nausea and headaches and The Virtual Boy was discontinued the following year. A year earlier, Sega also discontinued development of its own visor-based VR system, issuing a tongue-in-cheek public explanation that the virtual reality experience had been so realistic that test subjects were injuring themselves by attempting to walk into virtual spaces while wearing the visor. Put bluntly, we can consider the rampant commercial depictions of VR in 1995 as an instance of the movie industry launching a highly effective attack against the gaming industry, successfully raising consumer expectations to the level of big-budget Hollywood feature films. 
>
>Subsequent years saw the rapid decline of commercial viability for Virtual Reality in the decade after 1995; development funds that had been channeled to VR labs at Atari and NASA Ames were eclipsed by the frenzy of speculative investment in the Internet, leading to the dotcom bubble and subsequent collapse just five years later. To overstate the case only slightly, "virtual virtual reality" on TV and in movies *killed* real virtual reality as a medium for commercial entertainment in the mid 1990s.

## Video Representation of Virtual Reality or Virtual Virtual Reality

[1970](#1970) ◆ 
[1971](#1971) ◆ 
[1972](#1972) ◆ 
[1973](#1973) ◆ 
[1974](#1974) ◆ 
[1975](#1975) ◆ 
[1976](#1976) ◆ 
[1977](#1977) ◆ 
[1978](#1978) ◆ 
[1979](#1979)   
[1980](#1980) ◆ 
[1981](#1981) ◆ 
[1982](#1982) ◆ 
[1983](#1983) ◆ 
[1984](#1984) ◆ 
[1985](#1985) ◆ 
[1986](#1986) ◆ 
[1987](#1987) ◆ 
[1988](#1988) ◆ 
[1989](#1989)   
[1990](#1990) ◆ 
[1991](#1991) ◆ 
[1992](#1992) ◆ 
[1993](#1993) ◆ 
[1994](#1994) ◆ 
[1995](#1995) ◆ 
[1996](#1996) ◆ 
[1997](#1997) ◆ 
[1998](#1998) ◆ 
[1999](#1999)   
[2000](#2000) ◆ 
[2001](#2001) ◆ 
[2002](#2002) ◆ 
[2003](#2003) ◆ 
[2004](#2004) ◆ 
[2005](#2005) ◆ 
[2006](#2006) ◆ 
[2007](#2007) ◆ 
[2008](#2008) ◆ 
[2009](#2009)   
[2010](#2010) ◆ 
[2011](#2011) ◆ 
[2012](#2012) ◆ 
[2013](#2013) ◆ 
[2014](#2014) ◆ 
[2015](#2015) ◆ 
[2016](#2016) ◆ 
[2017](#2017) 

## 1969
### The Illustrated Man
From a 1951 book of eighteen science fiction short stories by Ray Bradbury that explores the nature of mankind. A recurring theme throughout the eighteen stories is the conflict of the cold mechanics of technology and the psychology of people.

"The Veldt"
Parents in a futuristic society worry about their children's mental health when their new virtual reality nursery, which can produce any environment the children imagine, continually projects an African veldt populated by lions feasting on carcasses. A child psychologist suggests that the automated house is not good for the children's development (or the parents'), and insists they disable the automation and take a vacation to become more self-sufficient. The children are not pleased with this decision, but later coolly agree to it. The children trap their parents in the nursery, where they become prey to the lions. They later have lunch on the veldt with the child psychologist, who sees the lions feasting but does not recognize what has happened.
## 1970
## 1971
## 1972
## 1973
### World on a Wire / Welt Am Draht
For fans of 1970s sci-fi - think the colours and paranoia of A Clockwork Orange and The Andromeda Strain - then German virtual reality-focused Welt Am Draht, or World on Wire, is the classic missing from your set.
It's based on the same book as The Thirteenth Floor, so once again centres around the murder of the man who created a virtual world known as the Simulacron. While there's no difference in the major plot lines, what makes this one worth watching all the same is the claustrophobic sense of conspiracy that only Cold War thinking could truly capture. The stern German acting is also rather fun.

## 1974
## 1975
## 1976
## 1977
## 1978
## 1979
## 1980
## 1981
### Looker
Plastic surgeon Larry Roberts performs a series of minor alterations on a group of models who are seeking perfection. The operations are a resounding success. But when someone starts killing his beautiful patients, Dr. Roberts becomes suspicious and starts investigating. What he uncovers are the mysterious - and perhaps murderous - activities of a high-tech computer company called Digital Matrix.

## 1982
### TRON
Being one of the earliest films to explore the combination of human computer interaction, TRON is well known for its, at the time, exceptional graphics.  Knowing they stole video game designs from him, arcade bar owner Kevin Flynn (Jeff Bridges) keeps trying to hack into his former employer’s system to prove what they stole from him.  Foiled time and again, he sneaks into their office and inadvertently becomes immersed in cyberspace.
Full immersion:  Digitized by a laser, Kevin Flynn is downloaded into cyberspace with full presence due to his absence from the real world.

## 1983
### Brainstorm
Film directed by Douglas Trumbull (who also led the special effects team on 2001: A Space Odyssey), follows a team of scientists who develop a means of recording memories. These memories can be ‘played back’ and experienced by another person, with full sense of emotion and all senses.

### Videodrome
Canadian science fiction film written and directed by David Cronenberg, starring James Woods, Sonja Smits, and singer Deborah Harry. Set in Toronto during the early 1980s, it follows the CEO of a small UHF television station who stumbles upon a broadcast signal featuring extreme violence and torture. The layers of deception and mind-control conspiracy unfold as he uncovers the signal's source and loses touch with reality in a series of increasingly bizarre and violent organic hallucinations. The film has been described as "techno-surrealist".

## 1984
### Dreamscape
A young psychic on the run from himself is recruited by a government agency experimenting with the use of the dream-sharing technology and is given the inverse task of planting an idea into the mind of the U.S. president.

## 1985
### The Twilight Zone: Dreams for Sale
Directed by Tommy Lee Wallace, this short (a mere nine minutes long) episode of The Twilight Zone sees Meg Foster in the lead role as a woman on an idyllic picnic with her husband and two daughters. All seems well until Foster’s character notices her husband’s speech and the scenery stuttering and repeating. She becomes increasingly confused before awakening in a “Dreamatron” VR machine running a “Country Picnic” programme.
## 1986
## 1987
### Star Trek: The Next Generation
The Holodeck was introduced into the Star Trek universe in 1987 with the start of Star Trek: The Next Generation, and gave rise to some great episodes. The concept differs from most other VR concepts shown in film; it is more advanced and does not rely on clunky headsets of any kind. Instead, the Holodeck uses such phenomena as transported matter, tractor beams and shaped force fields to create a VR environment that is pretty much indistinguishable from reality.
## 1988
## 1989
### Back to the Future Part 2
Robert Zemeckis’s 1989 sequel to Back to the Future offers only a glimpse of virtual reality in the film’s depiction of 2015, which was still 27 years away when the film went into production. It’s not quite clear whether the JVC-branded goggles shown are for virtual reality or augmented reality, although Marty Junior’s interaction with his surroundings suggests the latter. Either way, the filmmakers made a pretty good prediction, with Google Glass and Samsung Gear VR both being available in 2015.

## 1990
### Total Recall
American science fiction action film directed by Paul Verhoeven, starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Rachel Ticotin, Sharon Stone, Ronny Cox and Michael Ironside. The film is loosely based on the Philip K. Dick story "We Can Remember It for You Wholesale." It tells the story of a construction worker who is having troubling dreams about Mars and a mysterious woman there.

## 1991
## 1992

### Freejack
Although virtual reality had been around for more than a decade, the early 1990s proliferation of VR narratives on film and television correlated more directly with advances in computer generated effects sequences that served to inflate consumer expectations of actually existing VR systems. In Freejack, multiple conventions of VR-oriented visual effects serve as the interface for a larger computerized network known as the "spiritual switchboard" where souls of the super-rich are stored temporarily until a new body can be found and their consciousness downloaded into them. [Critical Commons Manager](http://www.criticalcommons.org/Members/ccManager/clips/virtual-reality-and-computer-graphics-allow-the)

### The Lawnmower Man
Researching methods to increase intelligence, Dr. Lawrence Angelo (Pierce Brosnan) begins experimenting on chimpanzees using a combination of drugs and VR.  Seeing success, he advances to testing his methods on an intellectually disabled landscaper, Jobe (Jeff Fahey).  Jobe is run through a variety of advanced VR simulations and begins to see astounding results.
* Head mounted display: Resembling the consumer headsets of today, life-like field of view and motion is relayed.
* Bodysuit: Skin tight body suits are worn to both provide tracking of the arms and legs as well as relay touch sensations via haptic technology.
* Locomotion:  Taking advantage of a human sized gyroscope called an aerotrim, Jobe and Dr. Angela are able to move about and explore the virtual space.

### Mindwarp (Brain Slasher)
The year 2037: The loss of the ozone layer has left most of the planet a desolate wasteland scattered with highly radioactive “Death Zones”, except for several areas that still flourish.
Outworlders are un-mutated humans inhabiting the Death Zones. A few humans are Dreamers, who live in Inworld, a sealed biosphere maintained by the central Infinisynth computer. They spend all their time plugged in via implants in their necks, living through virtual reality fantasies.

### Toys
A comedic variant on the genre of VR HMD sequences for visceral stimulation and trivial entertainment  
The cinematic VR genre was apparently already well established enough by 1992 to include this parodic scene with what appears to be a smell input as part of the head mounted display apparatus. This technology is also interestingly situated within a toy company that is developing war games to be used for real military applications. Virtual Reality had not yet reached saturation levels in the Hollywood imaginary (that would come just three years later), but audiences were already expected to recognize on screen HMDs and the humor of accidentally inserting an earphone in the nose of a player. [Critical Commons Manager](http://www.criticalcommons.org/Members/ccManager/clips/a-virtual-reality-head-mounted-display-appears-to)

*The way VR was talked about at the time barely evolved, it seems: "It's just a prototype, it's going to get better." As did its potential applications.*

## 1993
### Arcade
Dante’s Inferno, the local arcade, has just installed a new VR game called “Arcade.”  Showing up to try Dante’s Inferno, Alex Manning (Megan Ward) and her friends are immediately drawn to play.  Once in the game, the main villain and namesake, Arcade acts as an overlord, challenging players, learning and adapting as gameplay progresses.  Little do they know, any players that lose are then imprisoned within the game and disappear from the real world.  As Alex and her remaining friends try to reverse the effects of the game they find the plans for world domination through at home models.
* Arcade cabinet:  Embracing arcades in a similar way that we’ve seen VR appear in arcades today, the Arcade cabinet has players step in and sit down in a photobooth sized game pod.  With the pod came a viewer for visual output that resembles the stereoscopes of the 1800’s that were some of of the first devices to separate left and right eye views to create a single image.  The cabinet also came with an attached set of haptic gloves for both tracking and sense of touch.
* Head mounted display:   With expansion to at home devices came the transition away from an arcade cabinet to setups a little closer to what you’ll see coming from the Big Three (Oculus, HTC, and Sony).  The Arcade head mounted display has the profile of ski goggle and includes eye holes for assumed pass through vision.
* Haptic gloves:  Similar to the gloves attached to the cabinet, the at home version exoskeleton design brings hand tracking and touch to VR.

### Demolition Man
A police officer is brought out of suspended animation in prison to pursue an old ultra-violent nemesis who is loose in a non-violent future society.
[A critical analysis of sex, cybersex, underground culture and societal control](http://www.criticalcommons.org/Members/JLipshin/clips/demolition-man-and-cybersex)

### Ghost in the Machine
Karl Hochman is a technician in a computer store. He is also known as the "Address Book Killer" due to his habit of stealing people's address books and proceeding to murder anyone listed in the book. While Karl is undergoing an MRI at a hospital, a surge of lightning courses through the building, and Karl's mind is transformed into electrical energy. Karl uses the electrical grid and computer networks to continue his killing spree. It is up to Terry, Josh, and computer hacker Bram Walker to stop him before it is too late.

### Wild Palms
The ABC miniseries Wild Palms both anticipates and recapitulates some of the most prevalent cliches of virtual reality in the early 1990s. Set in Los Angeles of the future, the narrative reflects the outcome of a number of 1990s cultural obsessions including paranoid culture, Scientology and the proximate future technology of virtual reality, manifested as a pyrrhic conflict between the "friends" and the "fathers," explained as manifestations of political movements represented by libertarians and fascists. 
A company with the slogan, "Is it real or is it Mimecom?" has produced a virtual reality engine created by a paraplegic designer, that threatens world domination, delivered by television. The later versions of the system are accompanied by a hallucinogenic drug called Mimezine, which amplifies the experience of VR, providing the illusion of touch, and therefore improving the experience of cybersex. 

## 1994
### Brainscan
Billed as an interactive horror game, Brainscan is the latest videogame to grab the interest of Michael Brower (Edward Furlong).  Once gameplay begins, Michael is introduced to Trickster, a visual mix between David Bowie and Freddy Krueger, who acts as his guide through a story filled with murder and dismemberment.  Upon waking up the next morning, Michael finds that all of the events he remembers from his play of Brainscan have also coincidentally occurred around his neighborhood in real life.  Did Trickster and his Brainscan make him a murderer?
* Full immersion: A videogame that induces hypnosis, Brainscan interfaces with the subconscious of any player to bend them to the will of the game.  Once controlled, all players believe they are playing a game when they are actually acting in real life.

### Disclosure
Michael Douglas and Demi Moore become entangled in a complex power struggle within an expanding tech company, DigiCom.  Losing his own network access, Douglas’s character must commandeer one of DigiCom’s VR systems to track down the files to clear his name.
* Head mounted display:  With a similar profile to Sony’s Playstation VR the headset is then also depicted within VR.  Within the program, the profile is mimicked on the user’s avatar but is instead used as an augmented reality device with a heads up display.
* Locomotion:  Placed in the middle of the tracking area is an omnidirectional treadmill that  that allows the user to walk in any direction.
* Body/hand tracking:  Strikingly similar to the Lighthouse sensors shipped with the HTC Vive, two cameras placed in opposite corners emit lasers that scan up and down to track the motions of both the body and hands.
* Hand interaction:  Initiated via keyboard and mouse input, once in the VR program a single glove is worn and used to interact with screens and items.

### Final Mission
Captain Tom "Outlaw" Waters is one of four Air Force pilots taking part in a "black" Defense project involving virtual reality. The project is managed by a secretive Colonel Anderson and overseen by General Breslaw. When two of his colleagues die during test runs after some erratic behaviour in the flight simulator, Waters begins to believe that there is a conspiracy among his superiors. He even begins to suspect his new lover, Caitlin Cole.

### Future Shock
This amazing scene from the 1994 film Future Shock (drawing bastardized inspiration from the 1970 book by Alvin Toffler) offers an apparatus free vision of virtual reality, allowing a therapist to immerse his patients in scenarios derived from their worst fears. The trope of VR as therapy was common enough in the mid-1990s, but Future Shock is the first example I have seen that requires only glancing into a glowing orb in order to be psychologically transported into VR. [Critical Commons Manager](http://www.criticalcommons.org/Members/ccManager/clips/futureshockvrtherapyhaleye.mp4)

### Mad About You
"Virtual Reality:" The episode crystallizes numerous stereotypes of the cultural imaginary surrounding virtual reality in the 1990s. Series protagonist Paul Reiser is deciding whether to invest in a virtual reality system developed by a preteen computer genius, which allows for an impossible array of VR experiences spanning the usual range of erotic, exotic or adventurous experience. Narrative tensions emerge over whether the system should be regarded as a "video game," a trivializing designation in the mid 90s, which would mark it as an illegitimate investment. [Critical Commons Manager](http://www.criticalcommons.org/Members/ccManager/clips/madaboutyouvrdescription.mp4)

### Timecop
Max Walker, an officer for a security agency that regulates time travel, must fend for his life against a shady politician who's intent on changing the past to control the future.
> Matuzak: [after catching Ricky with virtual reality porn] Damn it, Ricky, I catch you fucking this machine again, I'll break your neck.  
> Ricky: Sorry, chief.  
> Walker: Looks like safe sex to me.

### VR Troopers
VR Troopers was created by Haim Saban (creator of the similar Mighty Morphin Power Rangers series), with a cosmetic orientation toward a popularized vision of virtual reality as a generic fantasy action space. Like the more successful MMPR series, VR Troopers relied on stock footage from three different Japanese Metal Hero action series featuring indistinguishable characters in full body suits and motorcycle helmets for all action sequences. Given this cost-saving production structure, the show's investment in "virtual reality" was limited to narrative contrivances allowing its characters to transition between the real and virtual worlds where the narrative and actions sequences played out. VR Troopers quickly exhausted the available supply of stock footage and was canceled after two seasons. [Critical Commons Manager](http://www.criticalcommons.org/Members/ccManager/clips/vrtroopersopentitles640.mp4)

## 1995
### Evolver
Teenage computer whiz Kyle Baxter (Ethan Randall) participates in a virtual reality version of laser tag and is about to win a nationwide tournament, only to be disrupted by another player, a girl named Jamie. Despite his loss, he hacks into the company's system to make himself the winner of the prize: "Evolver" (voiced by William H. Macy), a robotic opponent armed with a compressed air gun, to compete against in a real-world version of laser tag. Whenever Evolver is defeated, he "evolves", becomes smarter, quicker and harder to beat (to simulate rising game difficulty).

### Hackers
Known to be a cult classic of the cyber punk 90s, Hackers is most famous for, you guessed it, it’s portrayal and focus around computer hacking.  Moving to a new school, Dade “Crash Override, formally Zero Cool” Murphy (Johnny Lee Miller) works his way into a hacker group that introduces him to Kate “Acid Burn” Libby (Angelina Jolie).  Together, they end up entrenched in a plot that leads them to trying to hack into Eugene “The Plague” Belford’s (Fisher Stevens) formidable Gibson supercomputer of Ellingson Mineral Company.
* Head mounted display: Used during the Gibson hack attempt, Dade wears a Google Glass like headset with a drop down heads up display.  On the display, Dade is able to fly through the low poly virtual environment of the Gibson.
* Consumer VR:  Seen used by Belford, Hackers actually features a VR rig that, at the time, could be found in arcades across the country.  Combining headset, hack trackers, and omnidirectional treadmill, Belford uses his Virtuality rig as a gaming escape.

### Hologram Man
An otherwise unexceptional cyber-thriller marred by terrible performances, writing, directing and effects, Hologram Man presents a blunt analysis of power relations in government and private sectors dominated by corrupt corporations in a technologized future. The film ends, paradoxically, with a reassertion of both a vigilante homicide and exhortation to "vote."

### Johnny Mnemonic
Making his first appearance in a VR movie, Keanu Reeves (Johnny) lives in a future where one of the only secure ways to transport data is to upload it into storage devices implanted in the brain.  With two different organizations hunting him down for this information, Johnny finds the need to access the Net via his futuristic VR tech.
* Head mounted display:  Fitting the mold of a headset that Apple would produce, Johnny dons a sleek chrome arc that covers from forehead to nose.
* Hand tracking: Lacking a keyboard or mouse, Johnny fits his hands into exoskeleton gloves that provide him with all of the motions of the finger and hands.  Though, they do not appear to provide any haptic feedback.

### Strange Days
American sci-fi movie directed by Kathryn Bigelow, offers a dystopian vision of Los Angeles in 1999. The premise of the film is built around an illegal electronic device called a SQUID, which is able to record events as they unfold directly from the wearer’s cerebral cortex. These memories are stored in device akin to a MiniDisc and can be re-experienced in full immersive VR by another person using a SQUID.

### Virtual Combat
Scientist brings virtual reality characters to life. Two are women from the cybersex game site. The third is a warrior who wants to unleash the rest of the bad guys from the virtual reality underworld. A border cop must defeat the virtual reality warrior while learning to relate to one of the cybersex babes.

### Virtuosity
Before releasing it to the masses, LAPD is using VR to train their officers in realistic simulations.  To get the best out of their officers they’ve developed the ultimate criminal, SID 6.7 (Sadistic, Intelligent, Dangerous), by combining the genetic algorithms of the cruelest villains of history.  Housed within his own USB esque module, SID tricks a developer into uploading his algorithm into an android,  bringing him to the real world and continuing a game of cat mouse that began in VR between him and cop, Lt. Parker Barnes (Denzel Washington).
* Locomotion/Body Tracking:  Resembling an amusement park ride, any cops put into training are strapped into an inverted roller coaster chair with an attached headset.
* Head mounted display:  Directly incorporated and supported by the simulator arm, the large domed headset is not a hindrance to the user at all.  While immersed in the simulation, the user has full sensory incorporation via a neural connection.

### VR5
In this scene from Fox's ill-conceived and short-lived, mid-90s TV series VR5, the show's main character, Lori Singer, enters the subconscious of a condemned man in an attempt to discover the truth of his guilt or innocence. A phone modem is used to access the subconscious, which is experienced as a shared, total sensory virtual environment. In keeping with the stereotypes of 20th century imaginings of the virtual, VR5 repeatedly focuses on experiences that are old, exotic, sexual or violent. This particular scene emphasizes the latter two as a scantily-clad Singer nearly seduces the condemned man while questioning him about his crime. [Steve Anderson](http://www.criticalcommons.org/Members/ccManager/clips/vr5-title-sequence)

## 1996
### The Lawnmower Man 2: Beyond Cyberspace
The original film's star Jeff Fahey was sensible enough to turn down this tawdry sequel, so he was replaced, in an inspired bit of meta casting, by Matt Frewer - previously famous for playing AI character Max Headroom in the 1980s.
Unfortunately, the creative inspiration ends there, as Jobe hatches another tedious plan to take over cyberspace. The one proper link with the previous film is young actor Austin O'Brien, who returns to play the now teenaged Peter Parkette - Jobe's old next-door neighbour. The sex, violence and chimps with guns of the original have all been airbrushed out of this more child-friendly sequel - Grant Morrison was even approached to write the thing at one point - and Beyond Cyberspace loses the last shred of its so-bad-it's-good charm as a result.

### Playboy: Girls of the Internet
Peak 90s aesthetic and weird, porn level plots of cyber sex.

### Virtual Encounters
Happy birthday, Amy. Amys boyfriend Michael gave her the deluxe, super-duper virtual encounter. This is his way of removing her inhibitions and allowing her to fulfill the desires hidden deep inside. He finds he has a real tiger by the tail.

## 1997
### Abres Los Ojos
Spanish film directed and by co-written Alejandro Amenábar, definitely falls into the dystopian VR camp. The film, which was given the Hollywood treatment by Russell Crow in Vanilla Sky in 2001, involves cryogenics in addition to recorded and manipulated memories. 

### Menno's Mind
Arriving just two years late to the party for cinematic portrayals of VR in 1995, Menno's Mind recycles only the most obvious cliche's from previous generations of cyber-films. Characters are uploaded to and from computer networks, 3D graphics depict processor activity, and worms visibly consume pixels on screen, while virtual reality simulators allow fantasies to become reality. Menno's Mind is part of the dystopian genre among technology films, even as it presents design fictions for a fully computerized home controlled by a voice interface.

### Nirvana
The film tells the story of a virtual reality game designer, Jimi (Christopher Lambert), who discovers that the main character of his game, Solo (Diego Abatantuono), has achieved sentience due to an attack by a computer virus. Asked by his creation (who feels everything the character in the game feels, including multiple deaths) to eliminate its existence, Jimi sets out to erase the game from the server of his employer, Okasama Star, before it's commercially released on Christmas Day, and thus spare Solo further suffering.

## 1998
### Sliders
"Virtual Slide:" The Sliders find themselves in a world where virtual reality has been incorporated into all aspects of daily life including "VR therapy," education, recreation and entertainment. Providing access to pleasurable memories and fantasies, VR headmounted displays are worn by nearly the entire population at all times, making even mundane tasks creative and enjoyable. [Critical Commons Manager](http://www.criticalcommons.org/Members/ccManager/clips/slidersvrwayoflife.mp4)

### Star Trek: Deep Space Nine
"It's Only a Paper Moon:" Returning to a familiar theme from Star Trek: TNG, the spinoff series Deep Space 9 returned to the themes of adolescent addiction and games as therapy with the episode "It's Only a Paper Moon" in 1998. In this episode, an adolescent boy has taken refuge in the space station's "holo-suite," which is generally used for recreation and alternative narrative scenarios. A meeting of station officers and concerned parties including a counselor and physician is convened to discuss the situation. The suggestion that spending time in a virtual world may serve a therapeutic function is initially ridiculed, but is ultimately accepted as a course of action by which it is hoped the boy may return to normal functioning.

### X-Files
"Kill Switch:" The brutal murder of a renowned computer programmer leads Mulder and Scully to investigate an artificial intelligence program loose on the Internet that has begun evolving on its own.

(Two episodes of The X-files were written by cyberpunk icon William Gibson and co-writer Tom Maddox at the height of the show's popularity: Kill Switch (S5E11 originally aired February 15, 1998) and First Person Shooter (S7E13 originally aired February 27, 2000).

Both episodes explore familiar Gibson topics: artificial intelligence, the line between virtual and real and the possibility of transferring consciousness into a computer network. Both episodes are among the most stylistically baroque in this era marked by high camp on the X-Files. Both episodes are densely packed with symptoms of televisual attempts to come to terms with the rising cyberculture of the 1990s and both take an ironic and excessive approach to portraying the cultural imaginary surrounding artificial intelligence, cyberspace and video games. It is possible to analyze these episodes along multiple vectors including gender politics, paranoid culture, anxieties about technology and stereotypes related to video games, cyberculture and computer hacking. The schizophrenia of these episodes may also be understood through the basic incompatibility of the fundamental anarchism of cyberpunk fiction and the middle brow constraints of prime time network television. The snide televisual critiques of the extreme violence and sexism of video game culture ring hollow when these same elements are used to spice up network programming with shamelessly lurid camera angles and scantily clad cybervixens.) [Critical Commons Manager](http://www.criticalcommons.org/Members/ccManager/clips/xfileskillswitchfoxvrcatfighthmdcybersex.mp4)

## 1999
### The Matrix
Directed by Wachowski sisters, remains the king of films based on the premise of virtual reality. Reality as all humans perceive it being a mere illusion created by sentient machines to subdue the human population while their bodies’ heat and electrical activity are used as a source of energy. Reeves’ character, computer programmer Neo, discovers the truth and is drawn into a rebellion against the machines.

### eXistenZ
Sitting in on the focus group for the latest, next generation VR game, Jude Law and Jennifer Jason Leigh star in this thriller in which technology has taken a turn towards the organic.
* Console:  Resembling the perfect mix of an Xbox controller and silly putty, circuitry has been replaced by living game pods.  A wired system, rather than plugging into an outlet each game pod plugs into a bioport in the human spine.  Similar to the wetwire technology seen in the Matrix films, these bioports create a full sensory and motion tracking experience for the user.

### Harsh Realm
Post-apocalyptic game simulator Harsh Realm, Chris Carter's short-lived series that recycled tropes of virtual reality, paranoid culture and videogames. Although much-anticipated, the series was canceled by Fox after airing only three episodes and the series was shifted to the Fox-owned FX cable network, where a total of nine episodes were completed. This video is supposed to introduce new players to the game scenario, in which they are assigned to kill the game's top-scoring player, a military dictator who has taken over control of the entire simulator and is threatening to extend his power to commit terrorist acts in the real world, but in fact, it functions as a one-way portal into the game, from which return is unlikely. 

### The Thirteenth Floor
Hannon Fuller (Armin Mueller-Stahl) recently completed a VR environment that perfectly renders a 1937 Los Angeles.  Populating his version of LA are computer generated human characters that live life unaware of their existence in a simulation.  That is, until someone from Fuller’s world logs in.  At that time, any player is thrust into the consciousness of an identical avatar, taking over his life as if it were his own.  When Fuller is murdered in the real world, his protege, Douglas Hall (Craig Bierko) must virtually travel back in time to follow Fuller’s trail of breadcrumbs.
* Full immersion:  To become their 1937 doppelganger’s, Fuller, Hall, and all others lie down on a table to then have the table slide back into a chamber not dissimilar from an MRI machine.  With an array of lasers constantly panning from head to toe, a full neural connection is established to induce presence.
* Head mounted display:  Slimmed down from the MRI-like machine is an over ear headphone style headset.  Assumed to be a neural data transfer, all that Hall must do is lay flat on a table and he is immersed.

## 2000
### The Cell
In a situation that is strikingly similar to the Apple vs. FBI standoff, psychologist Catherine Deane (Jennifer Lopez) and Agent Peter Novak (Vince Vaughn) must enter the mind of a comatose serial killer in order to find the location of his latest victim before she dies.  Using the latest VR technology, entering his mind means results in full presence and experience of the twisted mind of a killer.
* Head mounted display:  Suspended horizontally by cables, Deane and Novak use a combination of chemicals and a non traditional cloth head mounted display to sensory immersion.  With circuitry woven in and localized over the face, both parties have a cloth placed on their head.  The chemicals, injected into the arm, induce a sleep like trance but allow mind mapping and the transmission of signals from one mind to another.
* Haptic/body tracking suit:  Inspired by our own body’s inner workings, the haptic suits are designed to mimic the layout of the muscles; in both look and function.  With appropriately placed external muscles, as the mind attempts to move about the consciousness, the suit induces movement.

### Thomas in Love
Thomas is a young agoraphobic man; he's afraid of coming to any kind of contact with other people, so he lives totally isolated in his apartment. The story takes place in the near future where everything can be done through computers, so Thomas hasn't left his apartment for eight straight years. However, although his life seems complete, he misses human contact, so his psychoanalyst consults him to meet a woman through some on-line service. Is it possible for Thomas to fall in love with a woman? And if so, is he going to get out of his apartment for that woman?

### X-Files
"First Person Shooter:" A murder inside the high-tech world of a virtual reality game leads Scully to battle a deadly digital character in order to save Mulder's life.
See 1998 X-Files "Kill Switch"

## 2001
### Avalon
Something of an oddity as a Polish-Japanese collaboration, Avalon is a bit of an art house flick and rather a beautiful one at that. Like all on this list, it's set in future and one where the youth of the day are addicted to an illegal VR game that's best described as a fully-immersive version of Call of Duty.
It's filmed in a stylised sepia tint and with a haunting soundtrack to match scored by Kenji Kawai who also write the music for the Ring films as well as the Manga classic Ghost in the Shell. Don't expect the plot to be too clear nor the pace of the action to be that quick, but the dark depiction of the virtual and consequent blurring of the lines is very nicely done.

### Vanilla Sky
Vanilla Sky is kind of like a trippy version of The Truman Show. Tom Cruise's character David thinks everything is A-OK until he notices strange glitches - people who shouldn't be there and visions. Ultimately, he discovers that he is part of "Life Extension," a service that essentially puts sick or dying people in a lucid dream state until a cure for their ailment is found.

## 2002
### Cube 2: Hypercube
Hypercube is the idea of a twisted maze created by the dangerous mind of Alex Trusk whose existence has been under a cloud and was considered to be the first genetically engineered super human however, that's not true. The idea was manufactured as an experimental prototype of quantum telecommunication in an extremely large cyber environment by Izon, one of the most powerful weapons manufacturers in the world. The outcome is reality combined with virtual world of a theoretical four dimensional shape called hypercube. Its creator is among the 10 people trapped inside it every one of whom in a way is involved with Izon Weapon Corporation. 

### Die Another Day
A convenience of virtual reality as a story element in cinema is the often-used strategy of sprinkling narratively inconsequential alternative storylines in surprising places throughout the film. This allows creators to indulge otherwise "impossible" narrative elements, such as lead characters getting killed, romantic fantasies being indulged, and nightmare scenarios without happy endings coming to pass. These scenes conclude, as this one does, with an abrupt diegetic shift back to the main storyline, by revealing the virtual reality apparatus that made the deception possible, in this case, a pair of VR glasses. [Critical Commons Manager](http://www.criticalcommons.org/Members/ccManager/clips/the-duplicity-of-cinematic-virtual-reality)

### Minority Report
Murder no longer occurs in the future. Using the clairvoyance of the “Precogs,” the PreCrime police unit, led by Captain John Anderton (Tom Cruise) is able to prevent murders before they occur.  Are these murders guaranteed to happen?  Is it acceptable to lock up someone for a crime they were foreseen to do but never actually committed due to police intervention?
* Hand tracking:  With limited time, every Precog vision must be dissected and deciphered to discern the finer details of each possible crime.  To maximize efficiency, the department has replaced the keyboard, mouse, and regular computer monitor with gestural interaction on an interactive wall.  Through a combination of swiping, pinching, pulling, and more, Anderton is able to used his gloved hands to shuffle through, edit, and interact with the computer interface.
* Full immersion:  Voluntarily used by consumers at VR cafes and induced to would be murderers, exterior neural hookups induce immersion within individual VR pods.

### Storm Watch (Code Hunter)
Storm Watch is a movie released in 2002, directed by Terry Cunningham and starring Adrian Paul and Bai Ling, the music was composed by Sean Murray. The movie centers on a protagonist who plays a virtual reality online game, which suddenly turns into a race against time to stop a weather satellite from destroying the world. This film was released on DVD and VHS under the title Code Hunter.
Storm Watch features special effect scenes reused from Virus, End of Days, and Set It Off. 

## 2003
### The Animatrix
The Animatrix is a collection of several animated short films, detailing the backstory of the "Matrix" universe, and the original war between man and machines which led to the creation of the Matrix.

### Spy Kids 3-D: Game Over
“Game Over” is billed as the first major VR title to hit the market.  Imprisoned within cyberspace, the game’s developer, The Toymaker (Sylvester Stallone), builds the game around himself as a way to trick players into releasing him.  In an attempt to stop him before the consumer release, spy, Carmen Cortez (Alexa Vega) enters the game and becomes trapped, prompting her brother and ex-spy Juni (Daryl Sabara) to unretire and follow her in.  Teaming up with beta testers, they must battle their way through robot battle arenas, street racing, lava rivers and more to stop the Toymaker before it is too late.
* Head mounted display:  Billed as a 3D movie, Juni dons the same headgear as the audience to get his fully immersive experience.  Wearing the simple yet classic red and cyan lenses, he shows what the future could hold for VR with headsets fitting within the profile of modern glasses.
* Locomotion:  To gain a competitive edge, Juni is placed within a zero gravity chamber to provide full range of motion for all movements.

## 2004
## 2005
## 2006
## 2007
## 2008
### Sleep Dealer
The near future. Like tomorrow. In a world marked by closed borders, corporate warriors, and a global computer network, three strangers risk their lives to connect, break through the barriers of technology, and unseal their fates.

## 2009
### Avatar
James Cameron's epic 3D film features humans in a lab who use virtual reality to interact with the Na'vi people who live on a distant moon.

### Assault Girls
In the aftermath of a global thermonuclear war three battle tested women wage war in a virtual video game against giant mutant sand whales.

### Caprica
In this prequel to the 21st century Battlestar Galactica TV series, the planet of Caprica is figured as a kind of digital Sodom and Gomorrah, whose debauchery suggests that its destruction by Cylons may have been justified. The VR programmer genius daughter of "holoband" inventor Eric Stolz, Zoe has created a nearly perfect digital replica of herself, who exists in a virtual reality club scene ruled by extremes of sex, drugs and violent spectacle, including human sacrifice ("beyond that is the really gross stuff"). 
The existence of a nearly perfect human replica of a girl who was killed in the real world also occasions protracted debates and consternation about the difference between real and virtual humans and the status of avatars as digital beings who may or may not be deserving of civil rights. Typical televisual and cinematic discourse on the subject hinges on questions of agency, sentience and autonomy. In Caprica, avatars are constructed through the reassemblage of personal metadata, distributed across multiple information systems in the world, databases that preserve the traces of human and biological existence through which humans and their digital surrogates are constituted. [Criticcal Commons Manager](http://www.criticalcommons.org/Members/ccManager/clips/capricapaperinterfacevrgoggles.mp4)

### Dreamscape
A thrill-seeking Man signs up with Dreamscape Inc, provider of electronic dreams and vivid fantasies. Transformed into an unstoppable Courier, he enters a world of corporate espionage. Hunted by agents of the State and aided by unlikely allies, he carries out his mission with brutal efficiency. However, illusion quickly turns into nightmare as reality and fantasy blur.

### Gamer
American science fiction action thriller film written and directed by Mark Neveldine and Brian Taylor.[3] The film stars Gerard Butler as a participant in an online game in which participants can control human beings as players, and Logan Lerman as the player who controls him.

### Ghost Machine
Don't believe the lack of hype, Ghost Machine ain't all that bad. It's a top notch concept perhaps slightly ruined by the fact that the VR becomes a vehicle for the film's real purpose as a slasher. All the same, it's one of the smoothest and most modern portrayals of a computer-generated immersive experience that you'll see on screen.
Probably quite realistically, this advanced tech is the product and prized asset of the military and used to train their soldiers on battle manoeuvres. Of course, it gets pinched for a bit of weekend war gaming by some of the troops who decide to take a stroll through the virtual in a haunted prison. Whoops. Maybe not a must but enjoyably British.

## 2010
### L'autre monde
C’est l’été dans le Sud de la France.
Gaspard est un adolescent heureux qui partage son temps entre ses amis et sa copine, Marion.  
Mais Gaspard va rencontrer Audrey et sa vie va basculer. Car Audrey est belle, sombre et double.  
Sur un jeu en réseau elle se fait appeler Sam et cherche un partenaire pour mourir.
Pour tenter de l’approcher Gaspard se crée lui aussi un avatar, Gordon, et part la retrouver dans Black Hole.

### Inception
What if the virtual reality spaces you explored were someone else's dreams, and by extension, the hidden corners of someone's mind? In Inception, Cobb (Leonardo DiCaprio) leads a crack team of specialists through several layers of dreams within dreams in order to plant an idea for the purposes of corporate sabotage.
Through the use of one of his specialists, known as the architect (Ellen Page), travelers inside the dream space can bend the rules of physics and shift the landscape to help make the mission go smoothly. While not a digital experience, the simulated reality in Inception is still a fascinating exploration of the medium.

### TRON: Legacy
The movie is, of course, a sequel to the 1982 classic, but both feature a digital world, good vs. evil, some killer digital effects, and Jeff Bridges.

## 2011
## 2012
## 2013
### The Congress
Torn between her career and her family, Robin Wright plays herself in a fictional world in which moviemaking is being disrupted by some of the latest technology.  With the caveat of never being able to act again, Wright is presented with an opportunity to preserve herself digitally so that studios can insert and use her likeness as they wish.  Fast forwarding twenty years after accepting the deal, Wright has become one of the biggest names in the industry for films that she never had to do a physical thing for.  Being recognized as a trailblazer for this breakthrough technology, Wright travels to the award show in an animation zone, an area where chemical inhalation induces a perception of an animated version of yourself.  Defying laws of physics and nature, the animation zone presents Wright with the convolutions of the human mind and another choice to embrace the next generation of moviemaking and technology.
* Image capture: Upon signing the contract, Wright is ushered into a half dome with an array of hundreds of inward facing cameras designed to capture every nook, cranny, and feature of her physical being.  An advanced version of scanning and imaging technologies that are already being used today to preserve the human likenesses.

### The Zero Theorem
Waiting for a phone call about the meaning of life, computer programmer Qohen Leth (Christoph Waltz) isolated himself as he attempts to crack the Zero Theorem.
* Haptic/body tracking suits:  Leaving only the face open, a VR onesie covers the entire body, relaying both full tracking and haptic responses.  The suit is synced directly with the synapses of the brain and connects to the computer via a cable ponytail.
* Head mounted display: Lacking a headset other than the hood of the haptic suit, the user interacts with a flat screen and can access VR simply by pressing the enter button for full sensory immersion.
* Locomotion:  Though only shown briefly, locomotion for some experiences is accomplished via pedaling and is paired with a gamepad for interaction.

## 2014
## 2015
### Creative Control
In near future Brooklyn, an ad executive uses a new Augmented Reality technology to conduct an affair with his best friend's girlfriend...sort of.

## 2016

### Black Mirror
 Season 3 of Charlie Brooker's endlessly imaginative dystopian anthology series Black Mirror includes a couple of episodes which deal with virtual reality. In the lovely but melancholy, hour-long San Junipero, it is only revealed towards the end of the TV movie episode that the 80s party town in which two girls meet is inside a virtual world.

In Playtest, meanwhile, the future of VR and mixed reality - specifically gaming - is much more sinister and scary. In this version, the tech works via an implant and the gameplay is generated based on the individual's worst fears. Watch it on Netflix now.

### Captain America: Civil War
The latest blockbuster from Marvel, Civil War features a scene originally perceived as a simple flashback to the last time that Tony Stark (Robert Downey Jr.) saw his parents.  Upon further inspection, it turns out that it is actually an on stage projection of the memory directly from a current day Stark wearing augmented reality glasses.
* Head mounted display:  With no greater profile than his normal glasses, Stark is not only able to project his memories but is also able to alter the projection as you would a normal memory.  Called the B.A.R.F. (Binarily Augmented Retro Framing) system, the glasses neurally tap to the hippocampus, the center in the brain associates with emotions and memory.

### Creative Control
Not too far in the future, David (Benjamin Dickinson) lives in a world where all technology has taken a turn towards the simplistic style typically seen at Apple.  David is struggling to balance work and life when he is tasked with overseeing the biggest ad campaign of his career, Augmenta.  Billed as the first actually convincing augmented reality system, David’s time with his prototype only ends up digging himself into a deeper hole.
* Head mounted display:  Built around an open source AR operating system and fit into a clear Wayfarer mold, the Augmenta glasses offer seamless immersion. Similar to technology seen in smartphones, the Augmenta glasses can be spoken to to perform actions.
* Hand tracking:  Beyond spoken word, the hands are the primary source of interaction with the Augmenta interface. Larger menus and data sets are seen to be scrolled through via waving of the hand gestures.  Smaller interactions are generally controlled via touching the tip of the thumb to the tip of different fingers to varied inputs.

### Death Race 2050
It’s the year 2050 and America is controlled by an all-powerful corporate government ruled by The Chairman (Malcolm McDowell). The masses have been brainwashed with violent virtual-reality entertainment.
The event of the year is the Death Race, in which a motley crew of violent drivers compete in a cross-country road race, scoring points for shamelessly running people over and driving each other off the road.

### Holidays: Christmas VR
Debuting at this year’s Tribeca Film Festival, Holidays: Christmas VR stars Seth Green as a hapless dad trying to get his son the hottest Christmas gift on the market, the UVU VR headset.  Not just a movie featuring VR tech, the film is also an exploration in VR storytelling.  Whenever a character in the film puts on the UVU headset, the moviegoer can don their own headset to transform the film from the traditional 2D screen to 360 degrees in a similar way that the red and cyan 3D glasses were used in cinemas in the past.
* Head mounted display: Utilizes a form factor head mounted display that evokes thoughts of the View Master

## 2017

### Acknowledgements:  
First sourced on other great lists by: 

Tom Buchanan on [VR Scout](https://vrscout.com/news/how-hollywood-predicted-vr-in-movies/).  
Editor on [Extra](http://www.vrfilmpro.com/features/7-examples-of-virtual-realityas-depicted-in-the-1980s-and-90s).  
Dan Sung and Sophie Charara on [Wareable](https://www.wareable.com/vr/vrs-the-star-850).

Thoughts on VR on [Critical Commons]()
